Hello again!
In this video, we are going to talk about atomic types. We discussed in the last video that if we
make a variable atomic, that will have the same effect as using mutex locks around accesses to that variable.
So let's find out how to do that.
C++ 11 has an  header which defines a template called atomic.
The parameter for this template must be trivially copyable.
So that could be a built-in type or a class for which the copy and move constructors do nothing or have been
deleted.
Usually only bool, integer types and pointers are made atomic.
You can use more complex types,
but there is a risk that locks will be added, which rather defeats the point of trying to avoid locks.
If that is the case, then you can use a pointer which will not be locked.
By the way, if you are using C++17, then you can use the standard library shared_ptr as the template
type without it being locked.
To create an atomic variable, we put the type of the variable as the parameter.
So here we've got x, which is an atomic int.
Atomic objects must be initialized.
So we set this equal to zero.
We can assign to this.
x equals two
will atomically assign two to x.
And we can assign from it y equals x
will atomically assign y to have the value of x.
And note that y does not need to be atomic.
It could just be a normal int.
Each of these operations is atomic in itself, but the two together are not.
It is quite possible that
another thread could run between these two statements and modify the value of x.
So let's modify the program that we had before to use an atomic variable.
We need to include the
header...
And then we need to make counter an atomic int...
It is already initialized to zero, so we don't need to do that.
Now, let's see if that works...
Yes, there we are. The correct answer!
One million.
I want to talk about the "volatile" keyword, because this sometimes causes confusion.
In Java and C#,
it has a special meaning in threaded programs.
As I understand this, it does not provide locking.
So you still need to use a synchronized method.
If the variable is volatile within that method, then any modifications will immediately be visible
in every other thread.
So that's the second half of atomic, releasing the value, but not the first half, which makes the accesses
uninterruptible.
In C++, that is not the case.
It has exactly the same meaning as it does in single threaded code,
which is that the value of the variable may change,
even if there is not any code which explicitly modifies
it.
The main use for this is when you are working with hardware.
You will have some device which appears as
a memory address.
And then when you read from that address, you will get data from the device.
So you could, for example, read five times from the same address,
to get five lots of data.
The reason for making it volatile is that the compiler will see this when it is optimizing and think
that it can remove the surplus statements and just have one read.
The volatile keyword will tell it not to perform this optimization,
so it will actually generate code
for five separate reads.
Before the threading support was added to C++11 in the standard some programmers used volatile for when
we now use atomic, which was a mistake.
And just to confuse things even further - I think it was 2005 - Visual C++ had a non-standard volatile keyword,
which had the Java/C# behaviour, but they took that out once the new standard came in.
So just to prove that volatile will not solve the problem...
So there we are. 335,000. So we still have the problem with increments being lost.
So in C++, making this counter volatile has no effect on the behaviour of the multithreaded program.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time, but meanwhile, keep coding!